
# Problem Definition

An address in Cardano is always derived from a root key using BIP32 style derivation
except it uses a different elliptic curve than Bitcoin (Ed25519). 

The problem initially raised concerns exchanges which typically use one, single,
giant wallet per crypto currency and all users share the same space for addresses.

In the HD wallet case this translates to one account per wallet and thus the total
space for user addresses becomes 2^31. In this scenario according to the birthday
problem there is a non negligible chance of a collision occuring after a sufficient
amount of addresses have been generated.

The first child (or branch) of the root key is derived according to the _account index_
which by default lies within the range (2^31 (`10000000...`) -> 2^30) where the first 
bit represents the hardened state. As a BIP32 path this can be represented as `m/a'`. 

The second child is derived according to an _address index_ which follows the same 
rules as the account index for derivation.

In the current scheme the serialised form of an address has a size of 76 bytes, where 
each index takes up 5 bytes (4 bytes for Word32 and 1 byte CBOR overhead).

# Generation Strategies

There are currently two ways of generating a unique address, as depicted by the following
ADT, which is based on the source code at [wallet/src/Pos/Wallet/Web/Account.hs](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/d7e01933912cdd127b6ffac6bd01e0fb3f15a4f5/wallet/src/Pos/Wallet/Web/Account.hs#L109).

```haskell
data GenerationMode 
  = RandomMode
  -- ^ Generates an address where the second index is random and hardened.
  | DeterministicMode Word32 
  -- ^ Generates an address where the second index is parameterised.
```

The difference between `RandomMode` and `DeterministicMode` is that in `DeterministicMode` the
application / dependent code or user must supply the seed used to generate the index instead 
of it being generated randomly. `DeterministicMode` is used during the wallet backup and 
recovery process in order to recover the generated indices. 

The wallet uses a function called `genUniqueAddress` to generate addresses which in turn
uses the function shown below named `generateUnique`. In `RandomMode` this function tries 
to ensure that the index used is unique according to an arbitrary predicate `isDuplicate`. 
For addresses this predicate is called `doesWAddressExist` which checks storage for a 
pre-existing address.

In terms of BIP32 paths this extra index forms the `b'` in the derivation path `m/a'/b'` 
where `b'` is the hardened random address index.

## Random Address Generation

Currently the random address generation / deterministic generation is coded as follows.

```haskell
generateUnique
    :: (MonadIO m, MonadThrow m)
    => Text
    -> GenerationMode             -- ^ The type of address generation to use.
    -> (Word32 -> m b)
    -> (b -> m Bool)              -- ^ Whether this account is a duplicate of existing.
    -> m b
generateUnique desc RandomMode generator isDuplicate = loop (100 :: Int)
  where
    loop 0 = throwM . RequestError $
             sformat (build%": generation of unique item seems too difficult, \
                      \you are approaching the limit") desc
    loop i = do
        rand <- liftIO randomIO
        value <- generator rand
        bad <- orM
            [ isDuplicate value
            , pure $ isHardened rand      -- using hardened keys only for now
            ]
        if bad then
            loop (i - 1)
        else
            return value
generateUnique desc (DeterministicMode s1) generator notFit = do
    value <- generator (fromIntegral s1)
    whenM (notFit value) $
        throwM . InternalError $
        sformat (build%": this index is already taken")
        desc
    return value
```

The `genUniqueAddress` function attempts to prevent collisions by checking a local acid-state
cache for the same address and retrying in case of failure. The function relies on 
local storage instead of natural cryptographic constraints.

Should the address being generated not be within storage or should storage fail, there is 
then a non-negligible chance of collision which can occur and go unnoticed by dependent
applications.

Lastly `genUniqueAddress` is broken in the above implementation due to isHardened being 
used inapropriately and being able to simplify the implementation via randomRIO. This will be 
fixed as a matter of priority as a short term solution to the problem.

# Non-Random Generation

There is less chance of a collision in random generation when generating two
distinct accounts on the same root key since the index is picked randomly. 
In practice however this only matters when storage is not available and 
if no storage is available then the random generation is prone to collisions
and cannot be recovered and thus is strictly worse than sequential indices.

In the sequential case one can enumerate all the possible indices and then
fail when the maximum bound is reached, ensuring that no collision can occur.
Similarly in the case where storage fails once can simply iterate from 
firstHardened to find the user addresses.

Both depend on a notion of pre-existing indices however in the sequential
case there is only the reliance on one index which is the latest index. e.g: 
A wallet with an account index of 10 would mean that from 0 to 10 there are 
11 accounts in this wallet. In the random case one would have to store every
seed which is much less convenient.

The following algorithm solves the unique account problem sequentially.

```haskell
nextAccountId
    :: AccountMode ctx m
    => CId Wal                   -- FIXME Confusing name
    -> m (Either Text AccountId)
nextAccountId walletId = do
  walletMetaMay <- getWalletMetaIncludeUnready True walletId
  case walletMetaMay of
      Just walletMeta -> do
          updateWalletMeta walletMeta (cwAccountIndex walletMeta + 1)
      Nothing -> do
          return $ Left "No wallet was found"
  where
    updateWalletMeta walletMeta nextAccountIndex
        | nextAccountIndex > maxBound = do
            return $ Left "Account index max bound exceeded"
        | otherwise = do
            let nextWalletMeta = walletMeta { cwAccountIndex = nextAccountIndex }
            setWalletMeta walletId nextWalletMeta
            return $ Right AccountId
                { aiWId   = walletId
                , aiIndex = cwAccountIndex walletMeta
                }
```

Similar to this the following algorithm solves the unique address problem deterministically 
without reliance on randomness but instead relying on storage as above. Both of these
functions have been added to this pull request for demonstration purposes.

```haskell
nextAddress
    :: AccountMode ctx m
    => AccountId
    -> PassPhrase
    -> m (Either Text CWAddressMeta)
nextAddress accountId passphrase = do
    accountMetaMay <- getAccountMeta accountId
    case accountMetaMay of
        Just accountMeta -> do
            updateAccountMeta accountMeta (caAddressIndex accountMeta + 1)
        Nothing -> do
            return $ Left "No account was found"
  where
    updateAccountMeta accountMeta nextAddressIndex
        | nextAddressIndex > maxBound = do
            return $ Left "Address index max bound exceeded"
        | otherwise = do
            let nextAccountMeta = accountMeta { caAddressIndex = nextAddressIndex }
            setAccountMeta accountId nextAccountMeta
            addressMeta <- deriveAddress passphrase accountId (caAddressIndex accountMeta)
            return $ Right addressMeta
```

In the sequential case one does not actually need to store the paths within Cardano storage
since there is only dependence on the root key and exchanges can have the freedom to define
whichever HD paths they desire. 

# Level 3 Derivation Path

Adding an extra path as per BIP32 (m/aH/bH/cH) where bH will be known as the chain index
has the effect of decreasing the probability of a collision under random generation and
adds a chain index which significantly adds to the amount of addresses which can be 
contained within the HD wallet derivations.

In the sequential case this is a trivial addition although there is still the need to
update the format and test for backwards compatibility.

It also makes it substantially harder to bruteforce the key providing someone finds the 
root key though this would still not be considered secure (2^62 attempts) under standard
cryptographic assumptions. Similarly a collision space of 2^62 is still not desireable
if assuming the same account index.

Adding an extra path increases the max size of addresses from 76 bytes to 81 bytes under 
the current binary packing scheme.

# Solution 1 - Level 3 Extension

The initial proposed solution was to extend the addresses to be level-3 addresses and thus
random generation would be less prone to collisions.

### Pros
* Less chance of a collision occuring under random generation.
* Larger address space per account.
* Harder to bruteforce from the root key.

### Cons
* Requires major breaking changes and backwards compatibility testing.
* Is still prone to collisions.
* Book keeping of user address indices is the burden of Cardano.
* Address size grows to 81 bytes.

# Solution 2 - Sequential Indices

Another solution would be to replace the random generation code with sequential indices.
Given the current `genUniqueAddress` implementation this is similar to current except
with the added benefit of exchanges being able to keep track of linear indices for user
addresses.

### Pros
* Minor incompatibilities.
* No more collisions.
* Interface for exchanges is more convenient / predictable.
* Book keeping of user address indices can be decentralised.
* Forces random wallets to obtain entropy (and collision resistance) from the root key.

### Cons
* More prone to collisions if storage fails than current solution.

# Solution 3 - Deeper Level Extension

UUIDs require 122-bits in order to store enough data such that collisions are negligible.
It would be possible to have 4 levels of extra indices in order to guarantee that collisions
(`m/aH/bH/cH/dH/eH`) never happen when generating the HD addresses randomly.

### Pros
* No more collisions.
* No more need for storage / book keeping in order to guarantee uniqueness in address generation.

### Cons
* Major breaking changes.
* Address size grows to 91 bytes.

# Proposed Solution

The proposed solution which has been implemented (mostly) as part of this pull request is the
following:
1. Removal of random generation of HD addresses altogether since they introduce the possibility
of collisions.
2. Addition of nextAccountId / nextAddress for obtaining unique accounts / addresses using
sequential enumeration.
3. If a new _random_ address must be generated then re-generate the root key and re-derive 
according to the first hardened index.

In the long term it may make sense to update the wallets to be level-3 for the convenience
of having a larger address space and being closer to BIP32. I do not think this is critical
and it is a major task to ensure backwards compatibility.

The pros and cons are the same as 'sequential indices'.
